#D 1|1 OSINT|What OSINT is, and where the legal line sits|Explain OSINT, passive collection and the legal limits of an investigator.
Q What does OSINT stand for?
+ Open-Source Intelligence — intelligence built from publicly available information
- Online Security and Intrusion Testing
- Operating System Internals
- Open Server Interception Tool
E "Open source" here means open to the public (websites, social media, public records), not open-source software.
Q Which of these is PASSIVE collection?
+ Reading a public social-media profile without logging in to anyone's account
- Guessing the password of the subject's email
- Sending the subject a fake friend request to see private posts
- Port-scanning the subject's home router
E Passive means you only look at what is already public and never touch or trick the target.
Q You find the login page of a suspect's private account. What may an OSINT investigator do?
+ Record that the account exists and stop there
- Try a few common passwords
- Use a leaked password found in a breach dump
- Reset the password using the "forgot password" link
E Entering an account without permission is unauthorised access, a crime, even if your intention is good.
Q In India, accessing a computer, account or camera without permission is an offence under:
+ The Information Technology Act, 2000 (Sections 43 and 66)
- The Motor Vehicles Act
- The Right to Information Act
- No law, if the intention is good
E Section 43 covers unauthorised access and Section 66 makes it a punishable offence when done dishonestly; good intent is not a defence.
Q A crime-branch officer needs CCTV footage from a shop near where a girl was last seen. The correct way is:
+ Request it from the owner, backed by a legal notice if needed
- Hack the shop's DVR over the internet
- Guess the camera's default password
- Ask a friend who "knows hacking"
E Police obtain footage through consent or legal notice so that it is lawful and usable in court.
Q What is the difference between information and intelligence?
+ Intelligence is information that has been verified and analysed to answer a specific question
- Intelligence is always secret
- Information is always false
- There is no difference
E A pile of screenshots is information; "she was last seen at this bus stand at 6 pm, confirmed by two sources" is intelligence.
Q The intelligence cycle runs in which order?
+ Planning, Collection, Processing, Analysis, Reporting
- Collection, Reporting, Planning
- Analysis, Collection, Planning
- Reporting, Planning, Collection
E You decide the question first, then collect, clean up, analyse and finally report.
Q Why do investigators use a separate research browser profile and account instead of their personal one?
+ So their identity is not exposed and they do not tip off the subject by an accidental like or view
- To get faster internet
- Because personal accounts cannot search
- To hide from their own employer
E This is operational security (OPSEC); one accidental "like" from your real account can alert the subject.
Q In a red-team engagement, OSINT belongs to which phase?
+ Reconnaissance, done under written authorisation
- Exploitation
- Reporting
- Privilege escalation
E Red teams use the same OSINT skills to map a client's people and systems before any attack, always inside an agreed scope.
C Print the current date and time in UTC, to timestamp a line in your case notes.
A date -u
A date --utc
A date --universal
E Investigators log in UTC so that times from different sources and time zones can be compared.
C Save the page https://example.com to a file named page.html for your evidence folder.
A curl -o page.html https://example.com
A curl https://example.com -o page.html
A wget -O page.html https://example.com
E Pages change or get deleted, so you save a copy at the moment you see it.
T Write your own ground rules
S Before any practice, write a short rules page for yourself: what you will do, what you will never do, and who gets your findings in a real case.
X # I only use information that is public
X # I never log in to, guess or reset another person's account
X # I never contact the subject, their family or friends
X # I never publish what I find; findings in a real case go to the police
X # I practise on myself, on consenting friends, or in organised events
V every rule keeps you passive and inside the law
T Set up a case folder and log
S Create a tidy workspace for a practice case, with an evidence folder, a notes folder and a log that records the UTC time of everything you do.
H Brace expansion makes both folders in one command.
X mkdir -p ~/cases/practice-01/{evidence,notes}
X cd ~/cases/practice-01
X echo "$(date -u) case opened" >> notes/log.txt
X cat notes/log.txt
V the log shows a UTC timestamp and both folders exist
T OSINT yourself
S You are the safest legal target. Search your own full name, usernames, phone number and email, and list everything a stranger could learn about you.
H Use a private window so results are not personalised.
X # search "your full name" in quotes, then with your city and college
X # search each username you have ever used
X # note every result: photo, address, phone, school, relatives
X # tighten privacy settings or delete what you do not want public
V you have a written list of what is exposed and what you fixed

#D 2|1 OSINT|Search operators, archives and checking viral claims|Use advanced search operators and verify a claim before trusting it.
Q What does the operator site:example.com do?
+ Limits results to pages on example.com
- Opens example.com directly
- Blocks example.com from results
- Searches inside your own computer
E site: narrows a search to one website or domain, which removes most of the noise.
Q Putting a phrase in "double quotes" makes the search engine:
+ Match that exact phrase in that exact order
- Ignore the phrase
- Translate the phrase
- Search images only
E Exact-phrase search is the quickest way to find a specific name or sentence.
Q A minus sign before a word, as in jaguar -car, does what?
+ Removes results containing that word
- Makes that word more important
- Searches for the opposite meaning
- Sorts results by date
E Excluding words removes a whole unwanted meaning from the results.
Q What does filetype:pdf (or ext:pdf) do?
+ Returns only PDF files
- Converts pages to PDF
- Downloads every PDF automatically
- Finds pages that mention the word pdf
E Documents often carry more detail than web pages, including author names and dates.
Q A post you need was deleted yesterday. Where do you look first?
+ The Wayback Machine (web.archive.org) and other web archives
- Nowhere; deleted means gone forever
- The dark web
- The owner's password-reset page
E Archives store old snapshots of pages, so deleted or edited content can often still be seen.
Q A reel claims "123 girls were kidnapped in this city in 22 hours". What is the correct first step?
+ Look for the original source and an official statement before believing or forwarding it
- Forward it to every group to warn people
- Assume it is true because it has many views
- Add a bigger number and repost
E Verification means finding who first said it and whether official records support it; view counts prove nothing.
Q A photo is shared as "taken today at the incident". The fastest way to test that is:
+ Reverse image search to see whether the photo appeared online earlier
- Count the likes
- Ask the person who forwarded it
- Zoom in until it looks real
E Old photos are constantly reused for new events; an earlier copy online disproves "taken today".
Q Two news sites report the same claim, but both quote the same single viral audio clip. How many independent sources do you have?
+ One
- Two
- Three
- None, news is never a source
E Sources are independent only if they got the information separately; copies of one clip count once.
C Write a search that returns only PDF files from the site example.com.
A site:example.com filetype:pdf
A filetype:pdf site:example.com
A site:example.com ext:pdf
A ext:pdf site:example.com
E Combining operators narrows results sharply; each one removes more noise.
C Write a search for the exact phrase missing person, only on the site example.com.
A site:example.com "missing person"
A "missing person" site:example.com
E Quotes fix the phrase and site: fixes the place.
C Write a search for pages on example.com that have the word login in their URL.
A site:example.com inurl:login
A inurl:login site:example.com
E inurl: matches text in the address itself; red teams use it in recon to find login portals of an authorised target.
T Find public documents with operators
S Using only search operators, list the public PDF notices on your own college's website and note what each reveals (names, dates, phone numbers).
H Public documents only; do not try to open anything that asks for a login.
X # site:<college-domain> filetype:pdf
X # site:<college-domain> filetype:pdf "notice"
X # site:<college-domain> intitle:"time table"
X # for each result, note what personal details are visible
V you found documents without touching any login page
T Fact-check a viral claim
S Pick one alarming forward you received recently. Trace it back and decide whether it is true, false or unproven. Write your reasoning in five lines.
X # 1 write the claim as one exact sentence
X # 2 search the sentence in quotes to find the earliest post
X # 3 reverse-search any photo or video frame
X # 4 look for an official statement or a named, accountable source
X # 5 count independent sources and state your confidence
V your conclusion names the earliest source and the evidence for it
T See an older version of a page
S Open the Wayback Machine, look up a site you know well, and compare a snapshot from a few years ago with today's page.
X # open web.archive.org and enter the address
X # pick a year, then a highlighted date on the calendar
X # note three things that changed
X # copy the archive link: it is a stable reference for a report
V you have an archive link showing the older content

#D 3|1 OSINT|Finding people and the missing-person workflow|Pivot between identifiers and follow the rules for missing-person OSINT.
Q What is "pivoting" in OSINT?
+ Using one found identifier, such as a username, to discover the next one
- Rotating the screen
- Attacking a second server
- Deleting old notes
E A username leads to a profile, the profile to a photo, the photo to a location; each find is a step to the next.
Q Why is username reuse so useful to an investigator?
+ People often use the same handle on many sites, linking their accounts together
- Usernames are always real names
- Usernames reveal passwords
- Sites share usernames with police automatically
E One distinctive handle can connect accounts the person never meant to link.
Q You search a common name and get 40 profiles. How do you decide which is your subject?
+ Confirm with at least two independent identifiers, such as city, college, photo or friends
- Pick the first result
- Pick the one with most followers
- Message each one and ask
E Common names cause false matches, and a false match can harm an innocent person.
Q A breach-check site such as Have I Been Pwned tells you:
+ Whether an email address appears in known data breaches
- The current password of the account
- The person's live location
- Their private messages
E It shows exposure, not passwords; and logging in with any leaked password would be a crime.
Q In a Trace Labs missing-person event, contacting the missing person's family or friends is:
+ Forbidden; collection must be passive with zero contact
- Encouraged, to get faster answers
- Allowed only at night
- Required before starting
E Contact can frighten the family, alert a kidnapper or damage the police investigation.
Q Who should receive what you find about a real missing person?
+ The police or the organisers who pass it to police
- Your social-media followers
- The family directly
- Nobody; keep it to yourself
E Posting findings publicly can endanger the person and spread mistakes; police can verify and act.
Q Which finding helps a missing-person case most?
+ Recent activity that shows where the person was after they were reported missing
- Their school marks from five years ago
- Their favourite film
- The number of followers they have
E Fresh, location-related information is what moves a search forward.
Q Someone close to you has actually gone missing. What should happen first?
+ Report to the police immediately (dial 112; 1098 for a child)
- Wait 24 hours before reporting
- Start your own online investigation first
- Post their photo in every group and wait
E There is no 24-hour waiting rule; the first hours matter most, and OSINT only supports the police.
Q Publishing a private person's address and phone number online is called:
+ Doxxing, and it is harmful and can be illegal
- Pivoting
- Archiving
- Hashing
E OSINT findings go to those with authority to act, never to the public.
C Check which websites have an account named demo_user123, using Sherlock.
A sherlock demo_user123
A python3 sherlock.py demo_user123
E Sherlock only checks whether a public profile page exists for that name on each site; it does not log in.
C Compute the SHA-256 hash of screenshot.png so you can later prove it was not altered.
A sha256sum screenshot.png
E The hash is a fingerprint of the file; if even one pixel changes later, the hash will be different.
T Pivot from your own username
S Start from one username you use. Without logging in anywhere, see how many of your own accounts a stranger could link together.
H Practise only on your own handle or a friend who agreed.
X sherlock <your-username>
X # open each hit and confirm it is really you (photo, bio, city)
X # note every new identifier it exposes: email, other handles, links
X # repeat once from one newly found identifier
V you drew a small map: username -> accounts -> new identifiers
T Fill a subject profile sheet
S Make a one-page template for a missing-person case and fill it for a fictional person: basic details, online accounts, friends, last-seen day, and the source of every line.
X # Subject: name, age, city, physical description
X # Accounts: platform, handle, link, last activity date
X # Last seen: date, time, place, who reported it
X # Every line: source link + UTC time you captured it
X # Confidence for each line: confirmed / probable / unverified
V no line in the sheet is missing a source
T Read the rules of a real event
S Open the Trace Labs website and read the rules and scoring categories for their Search Party events. Summarise in your notes what is allowed and what is not.
X # note the "no contact" rule in your own words
X # list the categories of information that earn points
X # note which categories score highest and why
X # write down who receives the findings afterwards
V you can explain why contact with the subject is banned

#D 4|1 OSINT|Photos, metadata and working out a location|Extract image metadata and geolocate a photo from visual clues.
Q What is EXIF data?
+ Hidden details stored inside a photo file, such as camera model, date, time and sometimes GPS position
- A type of image compression
- A virus that infects photos
- The caption written under a post
E The camera writes this metadata automatically; most people never know it is there.
Q You download a photo from Instagram or WhatsApp and it has no GPS data. The most likely reason is:
+ Most social platforms remove metadata when a photo is uploaded
- The phone has no GPS chip
- GPS data expires after a week
- The photo is fake
E Platforms strip EXIF on upload, so original files (email, cloud, a seized phone) are far richer than reposts.
Q What is reverse image search used for?
+ Finding where else, and how early, the same image appears online
- Flipping an image left to right
- Improving image quality
- Reading EXIF data
E It finds the original source and earlier copies, which exposes reused or stolen photos.
Q A photo has no metadata. Which clue helps most to work out where it was taken?
+ Text on signs and shopfronts, such as language, phone codes and shop names
- The colour of the person's shirt
- The file name
- The number of likes
E Readable text narrows a location quickly: script gives the region, a phone code gives the city.
Q What can shadows in an outdoor photo tell you?
+ The rough direction of the sun, and so the approximate time of day
- The camera brand
- The person's age
- The exact street address
E Working out time from shadows is called chronolocation; a photo with long shadows was not taken at noon.
Q You think a photo was taken at a certain junction. How do you confirm it?
+ Match fixed features such as buildings, poles and signboards against satellite or street-level imagery
- Trust your first impression
- Ask in a public group
- Check if the weather looks similar
E Confirmation needs several fixed features lining up, not one similar-looking object.
Q Why should you strip metadata from your own photos before posting them publicly?
+ It can reveal your home location and device to strangers
- It makes the file bigger
- It lowers the image quality
- It is required by law
E What helps an investigator also helps a stalker; this is the defensive side of the same skill.
Q GPS coordinates inside a photo's EXIF data should be treated as:
+ A strong lead that still needs confirming, because metadata can be edited
- Absolute proof
- Always fake
- Useless
E Metadata is easy to change, so it is corroborated with visual clues or other evidence.
C Show all metadata stored in the file photo.jpg.
A exiftool photo.jpg
E With no options, exiftool prints every tag it can read from the file.
C Show only the GPS tags of photo.jpg.
A exiftool -gps:all photo.jpg
A exiftool -GPS:all photo.jpg
A exiftool -GPSLatitude -GPSLongitude photo.jpg
A exiftool photo.jpg | grep -i gps
E Asking for one tag group saves reading through a hundred lines of camera settings.
C Remove all metadata from photo.jpg before you share it.
A exiftool -all= photo.jpg
E Setting every tag to "nothing" clears them; exiftool keeps the original as photo.jpg_original.
T Read your own photo's metadata
S Copy a photo straight from your phone (by cable or email, not WhatsApp) and find out what it reveals about you.
H Send the same photo to yourself on WhatsApp and compare.
X exiftool myphoto.jpg
X exiftool -gps:all myphoto.jpg
X exiftool -CreateDate -Model myphoto.jpg
X exiftool whatsapp_copy.jpg | wc -l
V you can state the device, the time and whether location was stored
T Strip and compare
S Remove the metadata from a copy of your photo and prove that it is gone.
X cp myphoto.jpg share.jpg
X exiftool -all= share.jpg
X exiftool share.jpg
X sha256sum myphoto.jpg share.jpg
V the GPS and camera tags are gone and the two hashes differ
T Geolocate one of your old photos
S Pick an old outdoor photo of your own with the location turned off. Using only what is visible, find the exact spot on a map and write down each clue you used.
H Start wide (country, city) and narrow down.
X # list readable text: signs, shop names, number plates, phone codes
X # list fixed features: buildings, towers, hills, road layout
X # search the text, then open the area in a map's satellite view
X # match at least three fixed features before you call it confirmed
V you can point to the spot and name three matching features

#D 5|1 OSINT|Domains, IP addresses and email headers|Map an organisation's public internet footprint using passive lookups.
Q What does a WHOIS lookup show?
+ Registration details of a domain: registrar, dates and sometimes the owner
- The website's password
- Every visitor to the site
- The site's source code
E WHOIS is the public registration record; privacy services often hide the owner's name.
Q Which DNS record type lists the mail servers of a domain?
+ MX
- A
- NS
- PTR
E MX means mail exchanger; A maps a name to an IP, NS lists name servers, PTR maps an IP back to a name.
Q Certificate transparency logs (searched through crt.sh) are useful in recon because they:
+ Reveal subdomains that have been issued TLS certificates
- Reveal user passwords
- Let you issue certificates for the target
- Show the server's files
E Every public certificate is logged, so names like vpn.example.com appear without touching the target at all.
Q An IP address geolocates to "Pune". What does that actually tell you?
+ Roughly where the internet provider's equipment is, not a house address
- The exact flat of the user
- The user's name
- The phone model
E Only the internet provider can link an IP and time to a subscriber, and it does so on a legal request from police.
Q In an email's full headers, the "Received:" lines are read:
+ From the bottom upward, because each server adds its line on top
- From the top downward only
- In random order
- They cannot be read
E The lowest Received line is closest to the sender, so the trail starts at the bottom.
Q SPF, DKIM and DMARC results in an email header tell you:
+ Whether the message really came from a server allowed to send for that domain
- Whether the email has been read
- The sender's phone number
- The size of the attachment
E A "fail" here is a strong sign that the sender address was forged.
Q Shodan shows an internet-exposed camera at an address. Which action is legal for you?
+ Noting that it is exposed and reporting it
- Logging in with the default password to "check"
- Watching the live feed
- Changing its settings to secure it
E Seeing that a device is listed is passive; logging in to it is unauthorised access under the IT Act.
Q Which of these is ACTIVE and therefore needs written authorisation?
+ Running an nmap scan against the organisation's servers
- A WHOIS lookup
- Searching crt.sh
- Reading the company's public job adverts
E Active recon sends traffic to the target; red teams do it only inside an agreed scope.
C Look up the registration record of example.com.
A whois example.com
E WHOIS queries a public registry database, not the target's own servers.
C List the mail servers of example.com.
A dig example.com MX
A dig MX example.com
A dig +short example.com MX
A dig +short MX example.com
A host -t MX example.com
A nslookup -type=MX example.com
E DNS is a public directory; mail servers hint at which email provider the organisation uses.
C Find the hostname that the IP address 8.8.8.8 points back to (a reverse lookup).
A dig -x 8.8.8.8
A dig +short -x 8.8.8.8
A host 8.8.8.8
A nslookup 8.8.8.8
E A reverse lookup asks for the PTR record, which often names the owner or provider.
T Passive footprint of a domain
S Using passive lookups only, build a one-page footprint of example.com (or a domain you own): registration, name servers, mail servers and IP address.
H Nothing here sends traffic to the target's own servers except normal DNS.
X whois example.com | grep -iE 'registrar|creation|expiry'
X dig +short example.com
X dig +short example.com NS
X dig +short example.com MX
X dig +short example.com TXT
V you can say who registered it, where it is hosted and who handles its mail
T Subdomains from certificate logs
S List subdomains of example.com from public certificate transparency logs, without sending anything to the target.
H jq pulls one field out of JSON; sort -u removes duplicates.
X curl -s "https://crt.sh/?q=%25.example.com&output=json" -o crt.json
X jq -r '.[].name_value' crt.json | sort -u
X jq -r '.[].name_value' crt.json | sort -u | wc -l
V you have a de-duplicated list of names from the logs
T Trace an email you received
S Open the full headers ("Show original") of an email in your own inbox, ideally a spam message, and work out where it really came from.
X # copy the headers into headers.txt
X grep -i '^Received:' headers.txt
X grep -i 'Authentication-Results' -A3 headers.txt
X # read the Received lines bottom to top; note the first outside IP
X whois <that-ip> | grep -iE 'orgname|netname|country'
V you can state the sending network and whether SPF and DKIM passed
